Automations Guide (#10559)
PrefectHQ/prefect: docs/guides/automations.md

---
description: Prefect walkthrough on how to use automations and common best practices 
tags:
    - automations
    - event-driven
    - trigger
title: Automations and Common Use Cases
search:
  boost: 2
---

# Using Automations for Dynamic Responses

From the Automations tutorial, we were able to see the capabilities of what an automation can do and how to configure them within the UI. 

> In this guide, we will showcase common usecases where automations can shine when responding to your workflows. First we will create a simple notification automation in just a few UI clicks. Then build upon that with an event based automation where a deployment will be kicked off. Lastly, we will combine these ideas to create a well alerted and responsive deployment pattern. 

Reviewer: this may be clearer as bullets. id also remove extraneous language

> !!! Warning "Available only on Prefect Cloud"

Reviewer: this is the wrong formatting

![image](https://github.com/PrefectHQ/prefect/assets/26799928/59017e10-8efd-4fea-9081-d2766e463e6d)

        Automations are only available on Prefect Cloud, please refer to the [Cloud documentation](https://docs.prefect.io/2.13.4/cloud/#welcome-to-prefect-cloud) to see what 
        additional features are available such as Events and webhooks!

## Creating the test script

Automations are great when handling mixed outcome workflows, as you are able to respond to specific actions done by the orchestrator. 

> For example, let us try to grab data from an API and have a notification get kicked off of our end state. 

Reviewer: based on the end state?

import requests
import json
import pandas as pd

@task
def fetch(url: str):
    logger = get_run_logger()
    response = requests.get(url)
    raw_data = response.json()
    logger.info(f"Raw response: {raw_data}")
    return raw_data

@task
def clean(raw_data: dict):
    print(raw_data.get('results')[0])
    results = raw_data.get('results')[0]
    logger = get_run_logger()
    logger.info(f"Cleaned results: {results}")
    return results['name']

@flow
def build_names(num: int = 10):
    df = []
    url = "https://randomuser.me/api/"
    logger = get_run_logger()
    copy = num
    while num != 0:
        raw_data = fetch(url)
        df.append(clean(raw_data))
        num-=1
    logger.info(f"Built {copy} names: {df}")
    return df

if __name__ == "__main__":
    list_of_names = build_names()
```

From here, we can see that the data cleaning workflow has visibility into each step, and we are sending a list of names to our next step of our pipeline.

## Create notification block within the UI
Now let us try to send a notification based off a completed state outcome. We can configure a notification to be thrown so that we know when to look into our workflow logic. 

> 1. Prior to creating the automation, let us confirm the notification location. We have to create a notification block to help define where the notification will be thrown. 

Reviewer: i think you can use the word sent here. thrown signals error imo

![List of available blocks](/img/guides/block-list.png)

2. Let us navigate to the blocks page on the UI, and click into creating an email notification block. 
![Creating a notification block in the Cloud UI](/img/guides/notification-block.png)

3. Now that we created a notification block, we can go to the automations page to create our first automation.
![Automations page](/img/guides/automation-list.png)

4. Next we try to find the trigger type, in this case let us do a flow completion. 

![Trigger type](/img/guides/automation-triggers.png)

5. Finally, let us create the actions that will be done once the triggered is hit. In this case, let us create a notification to be sent out to showcase the completion. 
![Notification block in automation](/img/guides/notify-auto-block.png)

6. Now the automation is ready to be triggered from a flow run completion. Let us locally run the file and see that the notification being sent to our inbox after the completion.
![Final notification](/img/guides/final-automation.png)

> !!! Tip "No deployment created"

Reviewer: wrong formatting

        Keep in mind, we did not need to create a deployment to trigger our automation, where a state outcome of a local flow run helped trigger this notification block. We are not tied to creating a full deployment in order to have safe responses to our desired outcomes.

## Event based deployment automation 
We can create an automation that can kick off a deployment instead of a notification. Let us explore how we can programatically create this automation. We will take advantage of our extensive REST API catelog to help 'automate' the creation of this automation.  

Additionally, find more information in our [REST API documentation](https://docs.prefect.io/latest/api-ref/rest-api/#interacting-with-the-rest-api) on how to interact with the endpoints further.

> Let us have local deployment created where we can kick off some work based on how long a flow is running. For example, if the `build_names` flow is taking to long to execute, we can kick off a deployment of the same flow `build_names` but replace the count value with something less.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let us have local deployment created where we can kick off some work based on how long a flow is running. For example, if the `build_names` flow is taking too long to execute, we can kick off a deployment of the same flow `build_names` but replace the count value with something less.
```

By following the deployment steps, we can get started by creating a local prefect.yaml that looks like this for our flow `build_names`

```yaml
# Welcome to your prefect.yaml file! You can use this file for storing and managing
# configuration for deploying your flows. We recommend committing this file to source
# control along with your flow code.

# Generic metadata about this project
name: automations-guide
prefect-version: 2.13.1

# build section allows you to manage and build docker images
build: null

# push section allows you to manage if and how this project is uploaded to remote locations
push: null

# pull section allows you to provide instructions for cloning this project in remote locations
pull:
- prefect.deployments.steps.set_working_directory:
    directory: /Users/src/prefect/Playground/automations-guide

# the deployments section allows you to provide configuration for deploying flows
deployments:
- name: deploy-build-names
  version: null
  tags: []
  description: null
  entrypoint: test-automations.py:build_names
  parameters: {}
  work_pool:
    name: tutorial-process-pool
    work_queue_name: null
    job_variables: {}
  schedule: null
```

> Now lets grab our `deployment_id` from this deployment, and embed it in our automation. There are a wide variety ways to obtain the `deployment_id`, but the CLI can be the quick way to see all of the id's of your deployments. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now let's grab our `deployment_id` from this deployment, and embed it in our automation. There are a wide variety ways to obtain the `deployment_id`, but the CLI can be the quickest way to see all of the id's of your deployments. 
```

    "trigger": {
    "after": [
        "string"
    ],
    "expect": [
        "prefect.flow-run.Running"
    ],
    "for_each": [
        "prefect.resource.id"
    ],
    "posture": "Proactive",
    "threshold": 30,
    "within": 0
    },
    "actions": [
    {
        "type": "run-deployment",
        "source": "selected",
        "deployment_id": "YOUR-DEPLOYMENT-ID", 
        "parameters": "10"
    }
    ],
    "owner_resource": "string"
        }
    
    headers = {"Authorization": f"Bearer {PREFECT_API_KEY}"}
    response = requests.post(api_url, headers=headers, json=data)
    
    print(response.json())
    return response.json()
```
 
After running this function, you will see within the UI the changes that came from the post request. Keep in mind, the context will be "custom" on UI. 

Let us run the underlying flow and see the deployment get kicked off after 30 seconds elapsed. This will result in a new flow run of `build_names`, and we are able to see this new deployment get initiated with the custom parameters we outlined above. 

In a few quick changes, we are able to programatically create an automation that deploys workflows with custom parameters. 

> ## Using an underlying .yaml file

Reviewer: i think both the python script and this should just be scrapped for using the triggers key on prefect.yaml

    """Create or update an automation from a local YAML file"""
    # Load the definition
    with open(path, "r") as fh:
        payload = yaml.safe_load(fh)

    # Find existing automations by name
    automations = post("/automations/filter")
    existing_automation = [a["id"] for a in automations if a["name"] == payload["name"]]
    automation_exists = len(existing_automation) > 0

    # Create or update the automation
    if automation_exists:
        print(f"Automation '{payload['name']}' already exists and will be updated")
        put(f"/automations/{existing_automation[0]}", payload=payload)
    else:
        print(f"Creating automation '{payload['name']}'")
        post("/automations/", payload=payload)

if __name__ == "__main__":
    create_or_update_automation()
```

You can find a complete repo with these examples in our [recipes repository](https://github.com/EmilRex/prefect-api-examples/tree/main). 

In this example, we managed to create the automation by registering the .yaml file with a helper function. This offers another experience when trying to create an automation. 

## Using triggers, an AI function extension

> Lets take this idea one step further, by creating a deployment that will be triggered from a previous flow taking longer than expected. We can take advantage of [Marvin](https://www.askmarvin.ai/) that will help classify the data we are pulling in. Marvin is great in embedding data science and data analysis applications within your pre-existing data engineering worklows. In this case, we can use [Marvin AI functions](https://www.askmarvin.ai/components/ai_function/#ai-function) to help make our dataset more information rich. You can find more on potential usecases with Marvin on their page. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's take this idea one step further, by creating a deployment that will be triggered from a previous flow taking longer than expected. We can take advantage of [Marvin](https://www.askmarvin.ai/) that will help classify the data we are pulling in. Marvin is great in embedding data science and data analysis applications within your pre-existing data engineering worklows. In this case, we can use [Marvin AI functions](https://www.askmarvin.ai/components/ai_function/#ai-function) to help make our dataset more information rich. You can find more on potential usecases with Marvin on their page. 
```

Based on the automation trigger, similarly we can add a trigger to a deployment, that would be waiting for this specified event. 

> Let us look at this example below using Marvin's AI functions. We will be taking in a dataframe and use the ai function to start analyzing some of the work. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Let us look at this example below using Marvin's AI functions. We will be taking in a dataframe and use the AI function to start analyzing some of the work. 
```

---
description: Prefect walkthrough on how to use automations and common best practices 
tags:
    - automations
    - event-driven
    - trigger
title: Automations and Common Use Cases
search:
  boost: 2
---

# Using Automations for Dynamic Responses

> From the [Automations tutorial](https://docs.prefect.io/2.14.2/concepts/automations/), we were able to see the capabilities of what an automation can do and how to configure them within the UI. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
From the [Automations tutorial](/concepts/automations/), we were able to see the capabilities of what an automation can do and how to configure them within the UI. 
```

Reviewer 4: This is a link to concepts page - but a tutorial is mentioned.

In this guide, we will showcase common usecases where automations can come in handy by:
- Creating a simple notification automation in just a few UI clicks
- Build upon an event based automation
- Combine into a multi-layered responsive deployment pattern

!!! cloud-ad "Available only on Prefect Cloud"

>         Automations are only available on Prefect Cloud, please refer to the [Cloud documentation](https://docs.prefect.io/2.13.4/cloud/#welcome-to-prefect-cloud) to see what 

Reviewer 4: Use links that mkdocs will automatically resolve like this: `(/cloud/index/)`

>         additional features are available such as Events and webhooks!

Reviewer 4: I think they should be other lowercase. You'll be showing events and webhooks here I assume, so probably don't want to send folks elsewhere, so maybe just say "to see what other features are available" or something like that.

> ## Creating the test script

Reviewer 4: Test script makes me think it will be for a test, so maybe something else.

Automations are the one stop shop to react to different workflows by responding to specific actions recorded by Prefect. 

> 

Reviewer 4: I'd add a prerequisites section here - some other guides that have step-by-step instructions have and it can be good for users.

![List of available blocks](/img/guides/block-list.png)

2. Let's navigate to the blocks page on the UI, and click into creating an email notification block. 
![Creating a notification block in the Cloud UI](/img/guides/notification-block.png)

3. Now that we created a notification block, we can go to the automations page to create our first automation.
![Automations page](/img/guides/automation-list.png)

4. Next we try to find the trigger type, in this case let's do a flow completion. 
![Trigger type](/img/guides/automation-triggers.png)

5. Finally, let's create the actions that will be done once the triggered is hit. In this case, let's create a notification to be sent out to showcase the completion. 
![Notification block in automation](/img/guides/notify-auto-block.png)

6. Now the automation is ready to be triggered from a flow run completion. Let's locally run the file and see that the notification being sent to our inbox after the completion.
![Final notification](/img/guides/final-automation.png)

!!! Tip "No deployment created"

>         Keep in mind, we did not need to create a deployment to trigger our automation, where a state outcome of a local flow run helped trigger this notification block. We are not tied to creating a full deployment in order to have safe responses to our desired outcomes.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    Keep in mind, we did not need to create a deployment to trigger our automation, where a state outcome of a local flow run helped trigger this notification block. We are not tied to creating a full deployment in order to have safe responses to our desired outcomes.
```

## Event based deployment automation 
We can create an automation that can kick off a deployment instead of a notification. Let's explore how we can programatically create this automation. We will take advantage of our extensive REST API catalogue to help 'automate' the creation of this automation.  

Additionally, find more information in our [REST API documentation](https://docs.prefect.io/latest/api-ref/rest-api/#interacting-with-the-rest-api) on how to interact with the endpoints further.

Let's have local deployment created where we can kick off some work based on how long a flow is running. For example, if the `build_names` flow is taking too long to execute, we can kick off a deployment of the same flow `build_names` but replace the count value with something less.

By following the deployment steps, we can get started by creating a local prefect.yaml that looks like this for our flow `build_names`

> ```yaml

Reviewer 4: Could you please add a tab that uses deploy? Should just be the name = main block for the script above. Making that the default should cut down on the amount of work the user needs to do.

        "string"
    ],
    "expect": [
        "prefect.flow-run.Running"
    ],
    "for_each": [
        "prefect.resource.id"
    ],
    "posture": "Proactive",
    "threshold": 30,
    "within": 0
    },
    "actions": [
    {
        "type": "run-deployment",
        "source": "selected",
        "deployment_id": "YOUR-DEPLOYMENT-ID", 
        "parameters": "10"
    }
    ],
    "owner_resource": "string"
        }
    
    headers = {"Authorization": f"Bearer {PREFECT_API_KEY}"}
    response = requests.post(api_url, headers=headers, json=data)
    
    print(response.json())
    return response.json()
```
 
After running this function, you will see within the UI the changes that came from the post request. Keep in mind, the context will be "custom" on UI. 

Let's run the underlying flow and see the deployment get kicked off after 30 seconds elapsed. This will result in a new flow run of `build_names`, and we are able to see this new deployment get initiated with the custom parameters we outlined above. 

In a few quick changes, we are able to programatically create an automation that deploys workflows with custom parameters. 

## Using an underlying .yaml file

> We can extend this idea one step further by utilizing our own .yaml interpretation of the automation, and registering that file with our UI. This simplifies the requirements of the automation by declaring it in its own .yaml file, and then registering that .yaml with the API. 

Reviewer 4: I think you want a different term than "interpretation"

Let's first start with creating the .yaml file that will house the automation requirements. Here is how it would look like:

```yaml
name: Cancel long running flows
description: Cancel any flow run after an hour of execution
trigger:
  match:
    "prefect.resource.id": "prefect.flow-run.*"
  match_related: {}
  after:
    - prefect.flow-run.Failed
  expect:
    - "prefect.flow-run.*"
  for_each:
    - "prefect.resource.id"
  posture: Proactive
  threshold: 1
  within: 3600
actions:
  - type: "cancel-flow-run"
```

> We can then have a helper function that helps apply this .yaml file with the rest api function. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We can then have a helper function that applies this YAML file with the REST API function. 
```

    }
}
```
From a simple input, we can easily create an exposed webhook endpoint. 

![webhook-simple](/img/guides/webhook-simple.png)

Each webhook will correspond to a custom event created, where you can react to it downstream with a separate deployment or automation. 

For example, we can create a curl request that sends the endpoint information such as a run count for our deployment. 
```console
curl -X POST https://api.prefect.cloud/hooks/34iV2SFke3mVa6y5Y-YUoA -d "model_id=adhoc" -d "run_count=10" -d "friendly_name=test-user-input"
```
From here, we can make a webhook that is connected to pulling in parameters on the curl command, and then it kicks off a deployment that uses these pulled parameters.
![Webhook created](/img/guides/webhook-created.png)

Let us go into the event feed, and we can automate straight from this event. 
![Webhook automate](/img/guides/webhook-automate.png)

This allows us to create automations that respond to these webhook events. From a few clicks in the UI, we are able to associate an external process with the Prefect events API, that can enable us to trigger downstream deployments. 
![Automation custom](/img/guides/automation-custom.png)

> In the next section, we will explore event triggers that can help kick off a deployment.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the next section, we will explore event triggers that automate the kickoff of a deployment run.
```

> ## Using triggers, an AI function extension

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Using triggers
```

# control along with your flow code.

# Generic metadata about this project
name: automations-guide
prefect-version: 2.13.1

# build section allows you to manage and build docker images
build: null

# push section allows you to manage if and how this project is uploaded to remote locations
push: null

# pull section allows you to provide instructions for cloning this project in remote locations
pull:
- prefect.deployments.steps.set_working_directory:
    directory: /Users/src/prefect/Playground/marvin-extension

# the deployments section allows you to provide configuration for deploying flows
deployments:
- name: create-fake-user-dataset
  triggers:
    - enabled: true
      match:
        prefect.resource.id: "prefect.flow-run.*"
      after: "prefect.flow-run.Running",
      expect: [],
      for_each: ["prefect.resource.id"],
      parameters:
        param_1: 10
      posture: "Proactive"
  version: null
  tags: []
  description: null
  entrypoint: marvin-extension.py:create_fake_user_dataset
  parameters: {}
  work_pool:
    name: tutorial-process-pool
    work_queue_name: null
    job_variables: {}
  schedule: null
```

> Marvin allows us to extend our current workflows by offering robust data science applications without more maintenance. This offers a lightweight framework in responding to changes in your orchestrator unaccompanied by the extra overhead of setting up an automation within the UI. 

Reviewer 4: You've seen how to 
```suggestion
## Next steps

You've seen how to create automations via the UI, REST API, and a triggers defined in a `prefect.yaml` deployment definition.

To learn more about events that can act as automation triggers, see the [events docs](/concepts/events/).  To learn more about event webhooks in particular, see the [webhooks guide](/guides/webhooks/)
```

Each webhook will correspond to a custom event created, where you can react to it downstream with a separate deployment or automation. 

For example, we can create a curl request that sends the endpoint information such as a run count for our deployment. 
```console
curl -X POST https://api.prefect.cloud/hooks/34iV2SFke3mVa6y5Y-YUoA -d "model_id=adhoc" -d "run_count=10" -d "friendly_name=test-user-input"
```
From here, we can make a webhook that is connected to pulling in parameters on the curl command, and then it kicks off a deployment that uses these pulled parameters.
![Webhook created](/img/guides/webhook-created.png)

Let us go into the event feed, and we can automate straight from this event. 
![Webhook automate](/img/guides/webhook-automate.png)

This allows us to create automations that respond to these webhook events. From a few clicks in the UI, we are able to associate an external process with the Prefect events API, that can enable us to trigger downstream deployments. 
![Automation custom](/img/guides/automation-custom.png)

In the next section, we will explore event triggers that automate the kickoff of a deployment run.

## Using triggers

> Let's take this idea one step further, by creating a deployment that will be triggered when a flow run takes longer than expected. We can take advantage of Prefect's [Marvin](https://www.askmarvin.ai/) library that will use an LLM to classify the data we. Marvin is great at embedding data science and data analysis applications within your pre-existing data engineering workflows. In this case, we can use [Marvin AI functions](https://www.askmarvin.ai/components/ai_function/#ai-function) to help make our dataset more information rich. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Let's take this idea one step further, by creating a deployment that will be triggered when a flow run takes longer than expected. 
We can take advantage of Prefect's [Marvin](https://www.askmarvin.ai/) library that will use an LLM to classify our data. 
Marvin is great at embedding data science and data analysis applications within your pre-existing data engineering workflows. In this case, we can use [Marvin'd AI functions](https://www.askmarvin.ai/components/ai_function/#ai-function) to help make our dataset more information rich. 

Install Marvin with `pip install marvin` and set you OpenAI API key as shown [here](https://www.askmarvin.ai/welcome/quickstart/)
```

> Let's take this idea one step further, by creating a deployment that will be triggered from a previous flow taking longer than expected. We can take advantage of Prefect's [Marvin](https://www.askmarvin.ai/) library that will use an LLM to classify the data we. Marvin is great at embedding data science and data analysis applications within your pre-existing data engineering workflows. In this case, we can use [Marvin AI functions](https://www.askmarvin.ai/components/ai_function/#ai-function) to help make our dataset more information rich. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Let's take this idea one step further, by creating a deployment that will be triggered when a flow run takes longer than expected. We can take advantage of Prefect's [Marvin](https://www.askmarvin.ai/) library that will use an LLM to classify the data we. Marvin is great at embedding data science and data analysis applications within your pre-existing data engineering workflows. In this case, we can use [Marvin AI functions](https://www.askmarvin.ai/components/ai_function/#ai-function) to help make our dataset more information rich. 
```

---
description: Prefect walkthrough on how to use automations and common best practices 
tags:
    - automations
    - event-driven
    - trigger
title: Automations and Common Use Cases
search:
  boost: 2
---

# Using Automations for Dynamic Responses

From the [Automations concept page](/concepts/automations/), we saw what an automation can do and how to configure one within the UI. 

In this guide, we will showcase the following common use cases:

- Create a simple notification automation in just a few UI clicks
- Build upon an event based automation
- Combine into a multi-layered responsive deployment pattern

!!! cloud-ad "Available only on Prefect Cloud"

>         Automations are a [Prefect Cloud](/cloud/) feature

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        Automations are a [Prefect Cloud](/cloud/index/) feature
```

>         Automations are a [Prefect Cloud](/cloud/index/) feature

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        Automations are a [Prefect Cloud](https://app.prefect.cloud) feature.
```

>         Automations are a [Prefect Cloud](https://app.prefect.cloud) feature.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        Automations are a Prefect Cloud feature.
```

Now that you've seen how to create an email notification from a flow run completion, let's see how we can kick off a deployment run in response to an event.
## Event-based deployment automation 
We can create an automation that can kick off a deployment instead of a notification. Let's explore how we can programmatically create this automation. We will take advantage of Prefect's REST API to help create this automation.  

See the [REST API documentation](https://docs.prefect.io/latest/api-ref/rest-api/#interacting-with-the-rest-api) as a reference for interacting with the Prefect Cloud automation endpoints.

Let's create a deployment where we can kick off some work based on how long a flow is running. For example, if the `build_names` flow is taking too long to execute, we can kick off a deployment of the with the same `build_names` flow, but replace the `count` value with a lower number - to speed up completion.
You can create a deployment with a `prefect.yaml` file or a Python file that uses `flow.deploy`.

> === ".yaml"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
=== "prefect.yaml"
```

    - "prefect.flow-run.Failed"
  expect:
    - "prefect.flow-run.*"
  for_each:
    - "prefect.resource.id"
  posture: "Proactive"
  threshold: 1
  within: 30
actions:
  - type: "cancel-flow-run"
```

We can then have a helper function that applies this YAML file with the REST API function. 
```python
import yaml

from utils import post, put

def create_or_update_automation(path: str = "automation.yaml"):
    """Create or update an automation from a local YAML file"""
    # Load the definition
    with open(path, "r") as fh:
        payload = yaml.safe_load(fh)

    # Find existing automations by name
    automations = post("/automations/filter")
    existing_automation = [a["id"] for a in automations if a["name"] == payload["name"]]
    automation_exists = len(existing_automation) > 0

    # Create or update the automation
    if automation_exists:
        print(f"Automation '{payload['name']}' already exists and will be updated")
        put(f"/automations/{existing_automation[0]}", payload=payload)
    else:
        print(f"Creating automation '{payload['name']}'")
        post("/automations/", payload=payload)

if __name__ == "__main__":
    create_or_update_automation()
```

> You can find a complete repo with these examples in our [recipes repository](https://github.com/EmilRex/prefect-api-examples/tree/main). 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can find a complete repo with these APIs examples in this [GitHub repository](https://github.com/EmilRex/prefect-api-examples/tree/main). 
```
